For this project, you will work from a previous Major Assignment and 1) revise that content in order to 2) create a multimodal project, before 3) reflecting on this process in a presentation.

 

Assignment: Most of you will want to adapt your Inquiry Essay; see me to discuss if you’d like to revisit an earlier assignment. As you create your adaptation, be sure to do the following:

Develop a clear audience and purpose. Think about who would benefit from your research and who has the power to take action in response to your argument. Show an awareness of likely audience values and relationship to the topic under discussion.
Choose a multimodal medium (incorporating more than just written elements) and genre that suits the evidence you want to share and the audience you hope to reach. Consider which genre will be most appropriate for your audience: Are they likely to listen to a podcast? Would they benefit from a visual infographic? Do you want to create something more “academic,” or more “artistic”? Other potential genres include a video essay/TED Talk, zine, advertising or outreach campaign, photojournalism, comic, quiz/poll, etc.
Create your adaptation, reflecting on what did or did not work in your essay and revising your approach for your new genre and audience.
Prepare a 5-7 minute presentation reflecting upon your rhetorical choices. To begin: which assignment did you adapt, for what audience and purpose? What genre/medium did you choose, and why is it suitable for this audience? Then, explain and show examples of several key rhetorical choices and revisions you made to adapt your project for this medium and audience. Conclude with food for thought: What did you learn about working in this genre? What would you do differently if you had it to do over again? How did your argument or perspective change through this process?
 

Tips for Success

Take the revision aspect of the assignment seriously: do not simple “copy and paste” an essay into a new medium. Rethink and challenge your previous work to make it something new and newly impactful. In addition to changes in genre and medium, this may require changing your thesis, cutting or adding research, revising your structure, etc.
Your adaptation must be a standalone artifact, one that “speaks for itself.” For instance, if proposing a Ted Talk, record yourself giving the talk and submit that recording rather than just submitting slides. Be sure you have a plan for delivery or venue (for how this artifact would get to your audience).
Look at examples of your chosen medium/genre to learn how they responsibly incorporate sources and evidence. Cite all sources appropriately for the form of your project: your audience should be able to track down your sources and evidence through your adaptation itself. (You’ll also provide a written Works Cited for me—see below.)
 

Project Length: The work for this project should be equivalent to a 2000-word essay (i.e., an 8-12 min. video, 15-20 min. podcast episode, 1500-1750 words with 3 relevant images or graphics for a Zine,—see me to discuss your specific project).

Sources: At least 5; MLA Works Cited due along with your final Adaptation project.

Assessment: The adaptation itself (80%); 5-7 minute presentation and Works Cited (20%).

 

Addendum: 

Examples: students could take their initial rhetorical analysis (which was a written essay for a college class) and transform it into a small magazine (a Zine), using images, document layout, font, color, etc. to emphasize their points, as pieces of evidence, and so on. A student could turn their question from the research narrative into a series of interview questions and make a podcast where they ask their friends, family, students on the street, etc. about the topic. The project can extend your efforts to answer the previous important question, or a way of reapproaching the original text that you analyzed because you feel there’s more to talk about there. There are many more ideas than this, but these are simply some to start you off.

Include a clear and effective thesis or topic statement that answers my three questions:
What is happening, what are we talking about
How is it happening, how are we talking about it, and why is it happening
Why are we talking about this, who cares and why do they care, what are the implications of whatever we’ve found out so far
