Wright 1
Patrick Wright
Professor Taylor
English 1030.49
21 September 2025
The Use of Rhetoric in Wartime Speeches: Goebbels’s “Total War”
On February 18, 1943, Joseph Goebbels stood before a crowd of fourteen thousand
Nazis, and declared, “Nation, rise up, and let the storm break loose!” (Goebbels). This patriotic
line was part of Goebbel’s “Total War” speech, given just a few weeks after Germany’s retreat
from Stalingrad, the Germans first major loss of the war. Goebbels’s goal was to transform fear
and panic from national tragedy into nationality, by convincing the German public that the
country needed to mobilize every resource, soldier, and worker in Germany.
Goebbels’s speech demonstrates how rhetoric can be weaponized using symbols, rallying
fear, and turning individuality into nationality, creating what Kenneth Burke calls
consubstantiality, unification through language that blurs truth into a myth. By making every
German believe that their life was inseparable from the life of the nation, they would endure
hunger, death, and defeat if it meant they might survive.
The rhetorical situation within this speech is layered. Goebbels’s purpose was to push the
Germans toward complete war, even at the cost of death. The exigence was the dire military
crisis, with the Allies approaching through North Africa and an imminent invasion of Italy likely,
the Germans felt a need to act immediately. The type of speech was propaganda oratory,
designed to command the public rather than inform. The audience was simple on the ground
level, a group of handpicked supporters, specifically designed to cheer for Goebbels at specific
points in the speech, pushing a view on the radio that everyone agrees with what Goebbels is
Wright 2
saying. Goebbels wanted action, he wanted his audience to accept rationing, death, and longer
work hours, all while cheering. A broad context of the speech was Germany’s crumbling position
in the war and the obsession with making their country look powerful and great to the public.
One of the most important rhetorical strategies in the speech is Goebbels’s use of
borrowed symbols. The famous line that ends the speech was not his own. It instead came from a
poem by Carl Theodor Körner during the Napoleonic Wars, and Hitler himself had used it as
well. This is important because, according to Burke, symbols carry meaning, but also history in
which the phrase was used. By referencing Körner, he connected the Nazi struggle to earlier
times in history when people had transcended what was thought possible. Burke says that
symbols don’t just represent ideas, they represent history. Every word has a history of use that
might set off a different emotion, for example, the phrase “total war” (Goebbels) uses a
definition of total that represents dedication and sacrifice. He might compare this to the idea of
logology, meaning the power of words come not just from the meaning itself but from the way
the words are expressed. The audience isn’t just hearing history, they’re hearing language
perform, calling the entire nation into one community through urgency.
Goebbels often uses pathos in his writings, especially with fear. He asks, “Do you want
total war? Do you want it, if necessary, more total and radical than we can even imagine today?”
(Goebbels). This is a rhetorical question, however, it’s more of a command than a choice. After
this line, the specially picked audience yells “yes,” and it’s that staged agreement that conforms
individuals into a nation of one. That’s consubstantiality in action, the fear of defeat is converted
into pride for one’s nation, which becomes the solution to holding the nation together. Goebbels
managed to align the public’s personal fears with the destiny of the nation, removing the
interference between selfishness and Germany.
Wright 3
One of the most important parts of a rhetoric speech is structure. Goebbels starts the
speech by acknowledging the loss at Stalingrad, an unusual move since German propaganda
typically avoided admitting any weakness. He then defines the loss as an example of German
resilience by explaining that the loss is a test that, if passed, will show their true resilience
against the enemy. As the speech continues, the tone turns imperative, “The danger facing us is
enormous. The efforts we take to meet it must be just as enormous” (Goebbels.) Goebbels is
working to shape a discourse community, a group that has similar interests and vocabulary. By
repeating key words like “us” and framing defeat as a test to Germany’s strength, Goebbels
achieves unity through his rhetoric.
Some might argue that Goebbel’s speech was effective only because of Germany’s
desperate military situation and not his rhetorical methods. They may say that under these
circumstances, people would have accepted sacrifice since the situation demanded it. However,
while the Germans may have obeyed orders without his symbolisms, emotional appeals, and
transformation of individuality, they wouldn’t have felt the same kind of unification that the
rhetoric in his speech allowed.
Ultimately, Goebbels’s “Total War” speech shows us that by using rhetoric and therefore
words, people can mobilize entire populations, unify whole countries, and control the thoughts of
others. Burke’s theories on rhetoric show that words can shape reality using symbols, fear, and
emotion. If rhetoric is able to convince the German people to accept death in the face of war,
then what could people in power get away with today? Whether in politics, the news, or in an
essay, by recognizing different types of rhetoric, we can resist the weaponization of it and
uncover the truth behind the words of others.
Wright 4
Works Cited
Burke, Kenneth. A Rhetoric of Motives. University of California Press, 1969.
Goebbels, Joseph. “Total War Speech.” 18 Feb. 1943, Berlin Sportpalast. German
Propaganda Archive, Calvin University,
https://research.calvin.edu/german-propaganda-archive/goeb36.htm
.
